1. What is the Node.js Event Loop? (0.5 Grade)

The Event Loop is the mechanism in Node.js that allows it to perform non-blocking I/O operations, even though JavaScript is single-threaded.

It continuously checks the call stack and event queue.

If the stack is empty, it picks the next callback from the queue and executes it.

This is what makes Node.js asynchronous and efficient for I/O tasks.

Analogy: Think of it as a waiter in a restaurant: while waiting for a dish to cook (I/O operation), the waiter can serve other tables (execute other callbacks).

2. What is Libuv and What Role Does It Play in Node.js? (0.5 Grade)

Libuv is a C library that Node.js uses internally to provide:

Event loop management

Asynchronous I/O operations (file system, network, timers)

Thread pool for CPU-bound tasks

Role in Node.js:

Handles all non-blocking I/O operations.

Allows Node.js to work asynchronously on a single thread by delegating heavy tasks to the thread pool.

3. How Does Node.js Handle Asynchronous Operations Under the Hood? (0.5 Grade)

JS code runs in the single-threaded call stack.

Asynchronous operations (like file read, network requests) are delegated to libuv, which either:

Uses the event loop for I/O operations, or

Uses the thread pool for CPU-intensive tasks.

When the operation completes, its callback is placed in the event queue.

The event loop then picks up the callback and executes it.

4. What is the Difference Between the Call Stack, Event Queue, and Event Loop in Node.js? (0.5 Grade)
Component	Description
Call Stack	Where JavaScript functions are executed (single-threaded).
Event Queue	Holds callbacks for asynchronous operations ready to be executed.
Event Loop	Continuously checks the call stack and event queue, moving callbacks from the queue to the stack when the stack is empty.
5. What is the Node.js Thread Pool and How to Set the Thread Pool Size? (0.5 Grade)

Node.js uses a thread pool (provided by libuv) for CPU-intensive or blocking I/O operations.

Default pool size is 4 threads.

You can change it by setting the environment variable UV_THREADPOOL_SIZE before running your script:

UV_THREADPOOL_SIZE=8 node app.js

6. How Does Node.js Handle Blocking and Non-Blocking Code Execution? (0.5 Grade)

Blocking code: Executes immediately and stops the thread until it finishes (e.g., synchronous file read). It blocks the event loop.

Non-blocking code: Delegates operations to libuv or thread pool, allowing the event loop to continue processing other tasks.